docs[open-telemetry]: Add specifications for content negotation and escaping, and docs for translation strategies for Otel metric name translation (#2653)
prometheus/docs: content/docs/concepts/escaping_schemes.md

---
title: Prometheus Metric and Label Name Escaping Schemes
sort_rank: 2
---

# Prometheus Metric and Label Name Escaping Schemes

## Abstract

This document specifies the different escaping schemes used by Prometheus for
metric and label names that contain characters outside the legacy character set.
These schemes are negotiated during scraping via the `escaping` parameter in the
Accept and Content-Type headers.

## Introduction

Prometheus supports multiple escaping schemes to handle metric and label names
that contain characters outside the legacy character set (a-zA-Z0-9_:). The
escaping scheme is negotiated during scraping and affects how metric producers
should format their metric names.

## Escaping Schemes

### No Escaping (allow-utf-8)

**Header Value**: `escaping=allow-utf-8`

**Behavior**:
- Metric and label names MUST be valid UTF-8 strings
- No character escaping is performed
- Because names are quoted in the exposition text formats, UTF-8 strings MUST
  be escaped using Go-style backslash escape codes for special characters,
  particularly quote and whitespace characters

> - Names MAY contain any valid UTF-8 character

Author: cursor dropped this in, yeah it does seem superfluous.  applied manually.

- This scheme SHOULD only be used when both the producer and consumer support UTF-8 names

### Underscore Escaping (underscores)

**Header Value**: `escaping=underscores`

**Behavior**:
- Any character that is not in the legacy character set (a-zA-Z0-9_:) MUST be
  replaced with an underscore
- The first character MUST be either a letter, underscore, or colon
- Subsequent characters MUST be either letters, numbers, underscores, or colons
- Example: `metric.name/with/slashes` becomes `metric_name_with_slashes`

### Dots Escaping (dots)

**Header Value**: `escaping=dots`

**Behavior**:
- Dots (.) MUST be replaced with `_dot_`
- Existing underscores MUST be replaced with double underscores (`__`)
- Other non-legacy characters MUST be replaced with underscores
- Example: `metric.name.with.dots` becomes `metric_dot_name_dot_with_dot_dots`

### Value Encoding Escaping (values)

**Header Value**: `escaping=values`

**Behavior**:
- The name MUST be prefixed with `U__`

> - Each non-legacy character MUST be replaced with its Unicode code point in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Each character that is not part of the legacy character set (a-zA-Z0-9_:) MUST be replaced with its Unicode code point in
```

I think it would be good to always mention the regex when we say "legacy". Legacy is clear to us maintainers, but probably don't mean anything to readers that don't have the historical context

  hexadecimal, surrounded by underscores
- Single underscores MUST be replaced with double underscores
- Example: `metric.name` becomes `U__metric_2E_name` (where 2E is the hex Unicode code point for '.')

## Default Behavior

If no escaping scheme is specified:

> 1. For legacy validation (metric_name_validation_scheme=legacy):

Reviewer 2: Is this a reference to the constant in prometheus/common?  If so, we should probably specify what the default value of that constant is. But generally, It seems better to just clearly write what the default overall escaping scheme is if there is no `escaping` header provided.

Author: yes this section is talking about  the Prometheus defaults.  I'm not sure if we need this block at all, it seems outside what a spec needs to define and is more a choice in Prometheus.

Reviewer 2: I think we should define client behavior if no escaping header is provided somewhere

Author: done
